---
layout: post
title: A quick position statement
category: money
standfirst: "Unlike other forms of tax, taxes on the rental value of land and other
natural amenities and also on the extraction of raw materials do no
economic harm. They are also easy to collect, hard to avoid and could
theoretically fund all our public services."
---
<h2>Taxes</h2>

<p>Unlike other forms of tax, taxes on the rental value of land and other
natural amenities and also on the extraction of raw materials do no
economic harm. They are also easy to collect, hard to avoid and could
theoretically fund all our public services.</p>

<h2>Intellectual property</h2>

<p>The point of patents and copyrights is to encourage innovation in the
arts and manufacturing, not to provide monopoly profits over and above
the costs of development. The law should reflect that.</p>

<h2>International Trade</h2>

<p>Large and long-lasting balance of payments disequilibria are
destabilising and harmful. A country incapable of supporting itself in
the supply of food and energy is strategically vulnerable. The global
trade of manufactured goods is largely unnecessary and its social
benefits over-stated. The social costs of exposing a national labour
force to competition with cheaper labour overseas is significant.</p>

<h2>International Finance</h2>

<p>Banking should never have been allowed to escape national boundaries.
The unrestricted flow of national currencies across national
boundaries is harmful. The Eurodollar market has been a dangerous
mistake and needs to be closed down.</p>

<h2>Currencies</h2>

<p>The Euro is a mistake and will fail because the Eurozone is too large
and the degree of economic convergence across national boundaries that
it requires is too large. Large currency areas impoverish those
regions unable to support themselves in trade with other areas. Even
within national boundaries, a single currency can impoverish those
parts of a country unable to produce as much value as they consume.
Only large transfer payments make such impoverishment feasible.</p>

<p>That&rsquo;s it for now.</p>