---
layout: post
title: Tustain on Debt
category: money 
standfirst: Paul Tustain, founder of BullionVault.com, unsurprisingly thinks that gold prices are going up.
---
<p>Paul Tustain, founder of BullionVault.com, unsurprisingly thinks that
<a href="http://www.bullionvault.com/GoldWhereToNow/">gold prices are going
up</a>. Even if it&rsquo;s only an
extended sales pitch, his video still makes some interesting points.</p>

<p>First, returns from gold mining are declining, squeezed by the expense
of extraction and the increasing effectiveness of governments in
extracting ecomomic rent from the miners, so that they are no longer a
good leveraged bet on the increase in the value of gold.</p>

<p>Second, taking data from the BIS, the UK is likely to have debt levels
of over 150% of GDP by 2020, that is well past the key 90% level
defined by Reinhart and Rogoff as the point beyond which debt crises
become likely.</p>

<p>Third, 2008 and 2009 saw bumper harvests that were statistical
outliers in a trend that is largely flat, while population and
consumption per head continue to rise inexorably. Any downturn in food
production is likely to lead to more price spikes.</p>

<p>Fourth, the apparently healthy maturity profile of UK government debt
is a result almost entirely of quantitive easing being focussed on the
long end of the maturity spectrum (i.e. what Buiter calls qualitative
easing). Almost none of the longer-term government debt is being
bought in the open market. If you strip Bank of England purchases out,
the profile of government debt is pretty unhealthy. Also most of the
private buyers of long-term debt are banks that can borrow short-term
from the Bank of England to finance these purchases. The banks are
making huge profits from this. And as long as the Bank of England
continues to buy long-dated government securities, the banks can
continue to sell back long-dated securities profitably. The Government
has made a profit on its purchase of banks' equities, which may be
good political PR, but the upshot is yet more debt on the Government&rsquo;s
books and of increasingly short maturities.</p>

<p>Finally, in Weimar Germany, inflation did start with the printing of
money by the government as it attempted to pay for reparations and
their own striking workers in the occupied Ruhr, but what caused it to
turn into hyperinflation was the resultant loss of confidence in the
Mark, which in turn caused private investors to demand more and more
for long term loans, so as people stopped trusting marks, any Marks in
long-term stores were converted into debt with shorter maturities and
eventually to cash and then anything that might hold its value. That&rsquo;s
when the gold price began to rise in terms of Reich Marks. So, long
term money was piling up as short term debt and then into cash and
assets.  In 1923, hyperinflation was preceded by an investment boom as
investors liquidated debt in favour of investment in industrial
capacity. Hyperinflation only really took off after that investment
led to industrial over-capacity.</p>

<p>In 2011, hedge funds are investing in commodities and pension funds
are investing in property. It looks not unlike Germany in 1923. The
upshot could well be severe inflation caused by the melting back of
bonds into cash and real assets.</p>

<p>There are only two choices for government: Slash public spending or default.</p>