---
layout: post
title: Learning a language
category: hidden
standfirst: "Some thoughts on learning Italian" 
---
I have been trying to learn Italian recently. Progress has been a bit slow, but I have found some things apparently more useful than others.

*Conversation*. Regular sessions on "iTalki":http://www.italki.com over Skype with native speakers have been very useful and inexpensive.

*Flashcards*. I now use "Flashcards Deluxe":http://orangeorapple.com/Flashcards/ (although I previousy used "StickyStudy Flash":http://www.stickystudy.com/flash.html) for iPhone, which aside from having an extraordinary number of configuration options, has the capacity to preload TTS (text-to-speech) for an entire set of flashcards in any one of a number of languages. I am using this to build up my vocabulary in advance of stepping up the reading and film watching.

It has been surprisingly hard for me to find vocabulary lists that I am entirely happy with. The overall quality on the various flashcard exchange sites is generally quite poor. Finding good flashcards in amongst the dross is hard and time-consuming. My favourite vocabulary lists are are at "ielanguages.com":http://www.ielanguages.com/. I particularly like the "Romance Languages Vocabulary Lists":http://www.ielanguages.com/romlang.html (perhaps when I have learnt the Italian vocabulary I can use it as the basis for learning French and Spanish, too).

I have tried several language apps for iPhone, including Mosalingua, Mindsnacks, Superflashcard, Babbel and Busuu, none of which I liked. In every case the interface got in the way of my learning in one way or other and was too prescriptive for my requirements.

I am now using a set of just under 1,000 flashcards based on Wiktionary's "list of 1,000 most frequently-used Italian words":http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Wiktionary:Frequency_lists/Italian1000 along with flashcards based on the ielanguages vocabulary lists.

There is some debate on the use of flashcards. Some people find them crushingly boring. Others have argued that trying to create a one-to-one correspondence between vocabulary in a reference language and the language being learnt is counterproductive. If flashcards are to be used at all, then they should use pictures not native vocabulary. All I can say is that I quite like flashcards. Also, I see English as a scaffolding to use while I am building up a new language. I expect it to fall away after a while.

Anyway, my plan now is to spend an hour every day doing flashcards and also whenever I have a minute or two free to get my phone out of my pocket. I am going to start by translating out of Italian and into English, in order to get me to a point where I can make sense of films and television.

*Reading*. My vocabulary is still quite thin. Once it improves, I intend to start reading regularly, starting with current newspaper articles. The trick will be to use a touch-sensitive Kindle loaded with an Italian dictionary (I am using "this one":http://www.amazon.co.uk/Electronic-Italian-Dictionary-Dictionaries-ebook/dp/B005BZKRPW) and to import content from Calibre. Every word or phrase that I don't understand, I highlight. The highlighted words or phrases are then available via "Amazon's Kindle site":https://kindle.amazon.com/your_highlights. I copy and paste all the highlights into a text editor, cut the extraneous copy, add the translations and add them to a flashcard list, which I then go through on my phone. It would be nice if this could be automated a bit more, but this should work pretty well for now.

The plan now is to read for a few minutes at the end of every day, either from a book or from a newspaper.

*Films and TV with closed-captions*. I have bought a number of DVDs of Italian films and TV series with Italian closed-caption subtitles in Italian ("sottotittoli per non udenti") from an Italian website. The idea is to start watching these regularly. I got this idea from "Ask a Korean":http://askakorean.blogspot.co.uk/2010/01/koreans-english-acquisition-and-best.html (_"God bless the closed caption, and the endless reruns of The Simpsons, Home Improvement and Full House &ndash; I had the caption on, and mouthed the word exactly as they sounded like. I said the difficult words over and over again until I got them right"_).

The plan now is to watch one episode of _Montalbano_ or _Romanzo Criminale_ every night.






