---
layout: post
title: Address by Geoffrey Crowther
category: learn
standfirst: "Address by Lord Geoffrey Crowther Foundation Chancellor At the formal inauguration of  The Open University July 1969" 
---
"To be chosen as the Chancellor of any university is a great honour. To be  named as the Foundation Chancellor of this unique institution is a distinction  of which I have difficulty in thinking myself worthy. But since the command  comes from the Queen in Council, I have accepted it with alacrity and with a  deep sense of gratitude for being given so elevated a platform from which to  observe the course of a great experiment. 

This is the Open University. 

We are open, first, as to people.

Not for us the carefully regulated escalation from one educational level to the  next by which the traditional universities establish their criteria for admission.  "We took it as axiomatic," said the Planning Committee, "that no formal  academic qualifications would be required for registration as a student."  Anyone could try his or her hand, and only failure to progress adequately  would be a bar to continuation of studies. 

The first, and most urgent task before us is to cater for the many thousands of  people, fully capable of a higher education, who, for one reason or another,  do not get it, or do not get as much of it as they can turn to advantage, or as  they discover, sometimes too late, that they need. Only in recent years have  we come to realise how many such people there are, and how large are the  gaps in educational provision through which they can fall. The existing  system, for all its expansion, misses and leaves aside a great unused  reservoir of human talent and potential. 

Men and women drop out through failures in the system, through  disadvantages of their environment, through mistakes of their own judgement,  through sheer bad luck. These are our primary material. To them we offer a  further opportunity. Almost we can say, like the Statue of Liberty in New York  harbour, "Give me your tired, your poor, your huddled masses yearning to  breathe free. Send these, the homeless, tempest-tossed to me. I lift my lamp  beside the open door." 

But if this were all, we could hardly call ourselves a university. This is not  simply an educational rescue mission - though that is our first task and we do  not decry it. But we also aim wider and higher. Wherever there is an  unprovided need for higher education, supplementing the existing provision,  there is our constituency. There are no limits on persons. 

We are open as to places. This University has no cloisters - a word meaning  closed. Hardly even shall we have a campus. By a very happy chance, our  only local habitation will be in the new city that is to bear two of the widestranging names in the history of English thought, Milton Keynes. But this is  only where the tip of our toe touches ground; the rest of the University will be  disembodied and airborne. From the start it will flow all over the United  Kingdom. 

But it is already clear that the University will rapidly become one of the most  potent and persuasive, and profitable, or our invisible exports. Wherever the  English language is spoken or understood, or used as a medium of study,  and wherever there are men and women seeking to develop their individual  potentialities beyond the limits of the local provision (and I have defined a  large part of the world), there we can offer our help. This may well prove to  be the most potent form of external aid that this country can offer in the years  to come. The interest of those all over the world who are wrestling with the  problem of making educational bricks without straw has already been  aroused, and before long the Open University and its courses, electronically  recorded and reproduced, will be for many millions of people their introduction  to the riches of the English language and of Britain's heritage of culture. 

There are no boundaries of space. 

We are open as to methods. The original name was the University of the Air.  I am glad that it was abandoned, for even the air would be too confining. We  start, it is true, in dependence on, and in grateful partnership with, the British  Broadcasting Corporation. But already the development of technology is  marching on, and I predict that, before long, actual broadcasting will form only  a small part of the University's output. The world is caught in a  communications revolution, the effects of which will go beyond those of the  industrial revolution of two centuries ago. Then the great advance was the  invention of machines to multiply the potency of men's muscles. Now the  great new advance is the invention of machines to multiply the potency of  men's minds. As the steam engine was to the first revolution, so the  computer is to the second. It has been said that the addiction of the  traditional university to the lecture room is a sign of its inability to adjust to the  development of the printing press. That, of course, is unjust. But at least no  such reproach will be levelled at the Open University in the communications  revolution. Every new form of human communication will be examined to see  how it can be used to raise and broaden the level of human understanding. 

There is no restriction on techniques. 

We are open, finally, as to ideas. It has been said that there are two aspects  of education, both necessary. One regards the individual human mind as a  vessel, of varying capacity, into which is to be poured as much it will hold of  the knowledge and experience by which human society lives and moves.  This is the Martha of education - and we shall have plenty of these tasks to  perform. But the Mary regards the human mind rather as a fire which has to  set alight and blown with the divine afflatus. This also we take as our  ambition.

What a happy chance it is that we start on this task, in this very week when  the Universe has opened. The limits not only of explorable space, but of  human understanding, are infinitely wider than we have believed. I am  reminded of Milton's description of an even greater return from Outer Space  with mission accomplished. "The Planets in their stations listening stood,  while the bright Pomp ascended jubilant. 'Open ye everlasting gates,' they  sung, 'Open ye heavens your living doors. Let in the great Creator, from his  work returned; Magnificent, His six days work, a World.'"
